US Drone Strikes in Yemen, Pakistan and Somalia

Evan Traverso, Aaron Kaufman and Spencer Davenport


  Our project examines the covert use of unmanned aerial vehicles, also known as drones, but the United States Government. The goal of this project was to analyze data collected about these covert strikes by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/). The Bureau has been tracking the use of armed drones by the US, with data going back to the first use of an armed drone for targeted killing in 2002 (Yemen). Much of the bureau's methodology is based off foreign media and eye witness accounts of these strikes (https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2014/05/23/get-the-data-what-the-drones-strike/). As the US government does not release information regarding the CIA's drone program in these countries, it is impossible to get exact numbers. In addition, our data was provided by the dronestream API, courtesy of Josh Begley (www.dronestre.am.com).
   
   There are a number of ethical issues and debates surrounding the use of drones. The Obama Administration has used drones for targeted killings of US citizens linked to terror groups, in effect violating the 5th amendment of the constitution. The use of military drones has also been argued to be in violation of international law by Amnesty International and other groups. Much of the narrative surroundings drone strikes views them as 'pinpoint' strikes with little to no civilian deaths, which is reinforced by counter-terrorism logic that assumes most military aged males in a hot-zone are affiliated with Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations. Critics have questioned if this method is even effective in combatting terrorism, as the high collateral damage may only fuel terrorist recruitment. It is also estimated that only 2% of those killed in drone strikes are deemed high-value targets. 
 
  Our findings indicate that the use of armed drones has been instrumental in the Obama Administration's foreign policy in Pakistan, Yemen and Somalia. There is a drastic increase in the number of people killed beginning in 2008, which peaks in 2010, 2011 and 2012. There has been a notable decline in the numnber of people killed by drone strikes in 2013 and continuing to 2016. Pakistan has seen the highest rates of drone related deaths, followed by Yemen and then Somalia. This has also resulted in Pakistan seeing the highest amounts of civilians and children killed. In Pakistan, strikes are concentrated along the border Afghanistan, particularly in North and South Waziristan and along the tribal regions. The percentage of civilians killed was highest in 2006, with a notable decline continuing until a brief uptick in 2011. However, it is important to note that this does not tell the entire story, as how civilians are defined has also changed. Our analysis show that pinpoint strikes are a myth; there are high numbers of civilian and child casualties involved in the deployment of armed drones by the US government. 
  
  https://plot.ly/~evan.a.traverso/18/us-drone-deaths-per-country/
  
  https://plot.ly/~evan.a.traverso/14/us-drone-strike-deaths/
  
  https://plot.ly/~evan.a.traverso/8/us-drone-strikes-by-country/
